---
notion-id: 2ae98e9c-907e-8054-8c28-f7cc540aa84a
base: "[[Readings — Course Files.base]]"
---
How to Defend Society Against Science
Paul Feyerabend
Fairytales
I want to defend society and its inhabitants from all ideologies, science included. All ideologies must be seen in perspective. One must not take them too seriously. One must read them like fairytales which have lots of interesting things to say but which also contain wicked lies, or like ethical prescriptions which may be useful rules of thumb but which are deadly when followed to the letter.
Now—is this not a strange and ridiculous attitude? Science, surely, was always in the forefront of the fight against authoritarianism and superstition. It is to science that we owe our increased intellectual freedom vis-à-vis religious belief; it is to science that we owe the liberation of mankind from ancient and rigid forms of thought. Today these forms of thought are nothing but bad dreams—and this we learned from science. Science and enlightenment are one and the same thing—even the most radical critics of society subscribe to this belief. Kropotkin wants to overthrow all traditional institutions and forms of belief, with the exception of science. Ibsen criticises the most intimate ramifications of nineteenth-century bourgeois ideology, but he leaves science untouched. Levi-Strauss has made us realise that Western Thought is not the lonely peak of human achievement it was once believed to be, but he excludes science from his relativisation of ideologies. Marx and Engels were convinced that science would aid the workers in their quest for mental and social liberation. Are all these people deceived? Are they all mistaken about the role of science? Are they all the victims of a chimera?
To these questions my answer is a firm Yes and No.
Now, let me explain my answer.
My explanation consists of two parts, one more general, one more specific.
The general explanation is simple. Any ideology that breaks the hold a comprehensive system of thought has on the minds of men contributes to the liberation of man. Any ideology that makes man question inherited beliefs is an aid to enlightenment. A truth that reigns without checks and balances is a tyrant who must be overthrown, and any falsehood that can aid us in the overthrow of this tyrant is to be welcomed. It follows that seventeenth- and eighteenth-century science indeed was an instrument of liberation and enlightenment. It does not follow that science is bound to remain such an instrument. There is nothing inherent in science or in any other ideology that makes it essentially liberating. Ideologies can deteriorate and become stupid religions. Look at what happened to Marxism. An inherently critical school is degenerating into a dogmatic and unscientific religion. See what happened to science. How could science lose its liberating force? How could it deteriorate into the dogmatic and repressive institution I have just described? Let me sketch a view on how this could be so.
Science
We all know what a scientist is. A scientist is a man who has had a special training and has acquired certain skills. That special training familiarises him with certain achievements, manners of speaking, arguing, of approaching problems. It familiarises him with scientific theories, methods, and what counts as a solution. It also and quite decisively influences his perception. It is impossible to see the world, perceive the world, except through the medium of such ideas, images, and 'facts'. And, most importantly, certain patterns of action become fixed and standardised through training. A good scientist always assures himself that he is dealing with a scientific problem; and he uses only those methods and only those theories that are recognized as scientific. Now all this would not create any difficulties if it were not for one fateful circumstance: the scientific attitudes and scientific behaviour patterns which are here achieved and tied down are not yet understood; they are not explicitly formulated; they are not in the form of a theory or an explicit ideology; they do not need such a formulation, for they are part of a practice. They are matters of habit, which means that they are effective without being the object of attention and criticism. This practice now becomes a standard. Training consists in making people adopt it. This, and only this, is what determines the difference between a scientist and a layman. Training divides the world into those who understand and apply scientific methodology and those who don't, scientists and laymen. It is important to realise this, for the 'science versus laymen' distinction cannot be drawn without it.
Now this situation would still be acceptable if the scientists simply went ahead with their work and left everybody else in peace. However, this is not so. Scientists make a considerable fuss about their methodology. They make claims for science as a whole. They claim that scientific methodology must be used in every area of human endeavour. They are unhappy about anybody learning things on his own. They want to replace individual enterprise by controlled and uniform public education. They want to force even simple business transactions into their scientific mould. They especially insist that scientific method must be used in political decision-making. Politics must be conducted according to science, must be made 'scientific'. Now it is quite obvious that political success depends on special knowledge (military knowledge, agricultural knowledge, technological knowledge, knowledge of human beings and their various customs) as well as on political acumen. Political success also depends on 'having the right nose' as people say. And 'scientific method', whatever this may be, certainly does not suffice for political success, simply because problems of politics are not scientific problems. This does not prevent scientists from demanding a voice in politics and from regarding political success as dependent on scientific evidence. Of course, the scientists are quite right that politics needs knowledge. But this does not mean that all knowledge must be in accordance with 'scientific method'. There are many things we know about the world that we cannot formulate scientifically; there are many results we arrive at in a perfectly competent manner that cannot be made to conform to the usual 'scientific' standards. As a matter of fact, 'scientific standards' themselves rest on political decisions and on political manipulation. This connection between science and politics is, however, almost universally denied.
Education
The above situation gives rise to very unpleasant consequences, which I now want to describe.
Consider scientific education and the education of lay people. Scientific education quite naturally prepares people for assuming scientific roles in society. It produces experts who do expert things. But as we have seen, scientific education also does something else. It divides society into experts and laymen, those who know what they are doing and those who don't. It creates a chasm between these two groups. And what is especially objectionable is that the division between experts and laymen is not supplemented by any corresponding distribution of political power. The experts have the knowledge but laymen keep the power. This very asymmetric situation has led to three alternatives:
1. Laymen make decisions, but then they must call in scientists in order to be informed what decision to make. The result: scientists now make political decisions. Scientists make all the important decisions. Politics is replaced by a scientific kind of social engineering. This is what is happening in most advanced countries in the world.
2. The second way is that of 'democratic relativism'. Laymen are supposed to have their own experts, scientists belonging to their political movement, who inform them and give them advice. Science appears to provide foundations for political actions of whatever kind. This may work on the surface, but leads to great confusion. Everybody now has his own 'science' and uses it as a basis for his political programme. No agreement, no reasonable discussion seems possible. Moreover, it is not the competing world views that produce alternative sciences; it is rather alternative sciences that produce competing world views. Once this has been realised, it becomes clear that the sciences, instead of being foundations of political action, are at most debating points. They do not provide a reason for accepting a political programme; they only provide convenient ways of talking.
3. Laymen keep the political power, which includes the right to evaluate, to criticise, and to control the work of the scientists. In order to do this successfully, they must be given the means to understand science, both in its details and in its general methodology. They must also be able to compare science with other forms of life. Such a comparison creates difficulties at once. How are we to compare science with forms of life that are very different from it? What makes science better than these other forms of life? The very possibility of a reasonable comparison now becomes doubtful. And it is exactly at this point that ideology and propaganda enter.
Science and Ideology
Scientists are not content with running their own playpens in accordance with what they regard as the rules of scientific method. They want to universalise these rules, they want them to become part of society at large and they use every means at their disposal—argument, propaganda, pressure tactics, intimidation, lobbying—to achieve their aims. This is how science becomes part of the ideological structure of society and this is how the 'scientific world view' is manufactured. It is not arrived at by argument. Nor is it simply a product of what scientists do, let alone a product of the Experimental Method. It is imposed, rather, on the outside world, by scientists, educators, intellectuals with the help of the educational machinery, with the help of newspapers, periodicals, books, Hollywood, political pressure groups, industrial corporations. Thus we have an ideology which is as repressive as any other ideology. It shapes human beings, it dominates their thought patterns, it restricts their imagination, it perverts their perception of the world in which they live.
So far we have seen how science, which starts as a liberating force and as an antidote to oppressive ideologies, turns into an oppressive ideology itself. We have seen how this oppression is achieved and what its consequences are. Looking at science in this way, we may compare it with other ideologies such as, for example, religion. And we may now ask: what makes science better than religion? Scientists certainly have different opinions from religious believers, they use different terms, they study different things, they proceed differently. But do these differences make science preferable to religion? Do they make science more true than religion?
My answer to this question is a firm and resounding NO.
Let me give you some of my reasons.
No ideology is inherently better than any other. It is all a matter of circumstances, of the people involved, of the task at hand. People who believe in democracy often point out that democratic systems are the only ones which allow for change in a peaceful manner. This argument can at once be turned against them. Granted democratic systems allow for change in a peaceful manner—but to what extent is such change desirable? Is change for its own sake a valuable thing? What about the case where change simply means increasing instability? What about those human communities which prefer stability to the unending turmoil we find in most Western countries? What about those individuals, within Western countries, who prefer a stable existence to a form of life that has change as one of its main characteristics? Besides, who has the right to impose democratic ideas on others? Certainly not the democratic ideology itself, for this ideology either respects the wishes of the majority, or it does not. If it does, then it cannot enforce itself where it is not wanted. If it does not, then it is not democratic. Also, if it does respect the wishes of the majority, then it cannot condemn a development which is brought about by the democratic means it advocates. But this is exactly what most democrats do. They condemn revolutions and they condemn developments such as Nazism or Communism which were carried out according to the rules of the democratic game.
Arguments such as these—arguments, incidentally, which are very popular among cultural anthropologists—have convinced many people that ideologies should not be judged on a priori grounds, that they cannot be arranged in a definite order of merit, that every ideology, whether scientific, religious or political, must be examined separately and in relation to the actual circumstances in which it operates. Truth, they say, is relative; there are no universal principles; the only universal principle, if there is one, is that of tolerance and understanding. This principle I want to recommend; but I want to recommend it in an even more radical manner.
Science and Other Ideologies
Let me now compare science with other ideologies, and especially with religion.
We can compare science and religion with respect to their effects on individuals and on societies. We can also compare them on a more abstract level, viz. the level of results and methods. I shall concentrate on the latter comparison.
Results: What about the results of science and religion? Well, one is inclined to say that science has achieved much more than religion ever has. It has shown us the structure of the world; it has improved our understanding of nature; it has increased our power over natural phenomena. Now I do not deny that science has achieved a lot—on the contrary. But I do assert that an unprejudiced comparison of science with other ideologies such as religion, or say, magic will discover that the results obtained by science are not necessarily better or more numerous than the results obtained by these other ideologies. First of all, the comparison must be a fair one. It is not at all clear what one has to do in order to compare fairly. Scientists have spent centuries perfecting their methods and collecting their evidence. Should one compare these methods and this evidence with the methods and the evidence available in the Stone Age? Or should one rather compare the present methods and achievements of science with present-day religious beliefs and achievements, or with magic, or with medicine as practised in China? The comparison becomes even more difficult if one wants to compare not just present-day achievements, but long-term effects, especially the effects on human beings and on societies. One would have to wait for centuries before making a judgment. However, for the sake of simplicity, let us compare twentieth-century science with some forms of medicine, religion, and magic which still exist today. What results do we get?
Very interesting results indeed!
Take medicine, for example. We are told, again and again, that Western scientific medicine has had great triumphs and has vastly increased the life expectancy of people. Its record in fighting epidemics is unquestionable, although epidemics seem to disappear, here and there, for no particular reason, and often before the corresponding medicines were found. For example, the Black Death disappeared in Europe though nobody knew what to do about it and though no new hygienic measures were introduced. However, the case of tuberculosis is not so clear. The tuberculosis death rate in New York and in England decreased steadily from the mid-nineteenth century on, regardless of any therapy that may have been used against it. Around 1945 to 1950 the decrease became more steep; this is when streptomycin and other drugs were introduced. Now it is interesting that the effect streptomycin had on the tuberculosis death rate is very similar to the effect the decrease of pirates had on global warming. I am joking, of course—but the case is not too different. The correlation between the introduction of streptomycin and the further decrease of the disease may be spurious. Also, a considerable number of diseases that were conquered in the West still flourish where there is no money for Western drugs and Western equipment, or where this equipment cannot be used. People living in these areas are not dying like flies—they have their own methods. When acupuncture was introduced in the West, many doctors and philosophers said that it was all hocus-pocus. Double-blind tests were demanded. The hypothesis was that acupuncture was faith healing and would disappear as soon as strict tests were made. Well, we know what happened—acupuncture proved more effective than many Western medical procedures and it was effective even on animals where no suggestion was involved. There are even more drastic examples. Western health care was introduced into various countries and health improved—but only up to a point. Then health deteriorated again, sometimes below the starting level. The reason: the conditions of life in these countries did not allow for a sustained application of Western methods. When these methods were no longer fully applied, when the hospitals started deteriorating and the drugs ceased to be imported, the diseases came back. They came back for the people who had now forgotten their own traditional medicine and put all their trust in the West. They had become dependent on the West and were left in the lurch.
All this is not to say that Western medicine is no good. Far from it. It is very good indeed and has saved millions of lives. But the same is true of Chinese medicine, of acupuncture, of medicine as practised by so-called primitive tribes. These forms of medicine are also very good; they have also saved millions of lives; and they do not make people dependent on large industries and a steady flow of expensive equipment.
Or take the Hopi rain dance. Many people regard this procedure as an exercise in futility. After all, we all know that rain has natural causes and that no dance will bring it about. However, we also know that a few hundred years ago the climate in many American Indian territories was quite different from what it is today. It was much more reliable and much more pleasant. Then the Indians were expelled from their land or exterminated, and the climate changed, for the worse. The dry plains of today are not the result of 'natural' processes—they are the result of the thoughtless interference of white farmers and white industrialists. Now, assume the Indians had continued their rain dances and had also retained their influence on the land. Is it then so obvious that the climate would have deteriorated as it has? Is it not much more reasonable to assume that the old rituals, carried out regularly and with the full authority of the tribe behind them, would have sufficed to maintain the old climate and the old rainfall? So I think the rain dance works—not perhaps by a direct magical intervention in the atmosphere, but by a long-term social process, involving custom and ritual, which, over the centuries, adapts both the land and its inhabitants to each other. And I am also sure that any tampering with this ritual, any attempt to 'rationalise' it, any attempt to make it 'scientific', would have destroyed its effectiveness.
This example shows very clearly how science tampers with cultures, destroys the natural balance between an environment and the society living in this environment, and replaces the balance by a form of life which is much less pleasant, much less humane, much more violent, and much less successful in the long run. Thus the problem is not that science doesn't produce results. The problem is that the results are judged by scientific standards, i.e. by the very standards whose universal validity is being questioned. Judged by other standards, the results don't look so good any more. They may even look worse than the results produced by alternative ideologies.
This leads me right into the next and final point: the comparison of methods. As far as methods are concerned, it is very difficult to achieve a fair comparison between science and other ideologies. Scientists proceed in a particular way. They are trained in a particular way. Their 'results' are results for them, they are not results for everyone. The same applies to other ideologies. Believers, shamans, members of so-called primitive tribes use different methods and achieve different results. Comparing the two groups is extremely difficult. It is almost like comparing the performance of totally different organisms. The difficulty increases when one realises that methods and results depend on each other. Standards of what constitute 'results' are part and parcel of the methods that are being used. Thus the problem of comparing different methods becomes the problem of comparing different standards. And this problem has never been solved in a non-circular manner. We cannot judge one method by the standards of another method. We must either use a universal standard—but this standard does not exist—or we must use the standard that is part of the method—but this makes the comparison circular and useless.
Now this situation is particularly unsatisfactory if one group uses its ideology to dominate all the others and declares that its own standards, its own form of life, must become the standards and the form of life for everyone. This is exactly what is happening in modern Western societies. Science is imposed on everyone. One might say that this is being done for humanitarian reasons: science has proved itself, it has shown that it can be successful, and so we want everyone to profit from this success. However, as we have seen, the alleged success of science is by no means clear. It depends on whose standards we use when judging this success. Using scientific standards, one of course arrives at the conclusion that science has been successful. But why should we use scientific standards? Why should they be more valid, more acceptable, more reasonable than the standards inherent in other ideologies? I see no reason whatsoever why science should be given a special place. And I am quite certain that imposing science on everyone is just as bad as imposing religion, or any other ideology, on everyone. The result is dictatorship, oppression, lack of imagination, lack of freedom.
Conclusion
What is the solution? What should we do in order to protect society from the unwelcome interference of ideologies, science included?
My solution is very simple. It can be formulated in two sentences.
First: We must separate science and society as we have separated church and state.
Second: We must give laymen the means of deciding not only how they want to be governed, but also what they want to be taught and what knowledge they want to acquire.
The first step is fairly obvious. Science, in a democratic society, is not and cannot be a measure of all things. It is one ideology among many and it must be separated from the state just as churches are now separated from the state. This means, of course, that science must no longer be taught in the same mandatory and authoritative way in which it is now being taught. Science must be taught as one view among many and not as the one and only road to truth and reality. It must be taught together with magic, religious cosmology, Hopi cosmology, Greek mythology, the Platonic cosmology of the Timaeus, Aristotelian physics, and so on. Myths must be taught, not as curiosities but as serious alternatives to scientific knowledge. We must teach that science, at its best, is not too different from these myths. Science is simply one way of interpreting the world, it is not the interpretation.
The second step is just as important. In order to give laymen the means to compare science with other ideologies, we must educate them. We must give them an education which makes them capable of criticising, of understanding, and of rejecting science if they want to reject it. But how is this to be done? Simply by teaching science and by teaching alternatives to science. Now this of course is a revolutionary demand. It demands a complete change of our entire educational system. It demands a change which will be resisted by teachers, by parents, by administrators. It will be called 'irresponsible', it will be called 'dangerous', it will be called lots of nasty things. But I do not care. Times have changed. Only fifty years ago religious education was mandatory and science was banned from many schools. Today science is mandatory and religious education has been banned from public schools. Now it is time to separate science and state and to give everyone the opportunity to learn about the nature of science as well as about alternatives to science. This will be a difficult undertaking. It will not only change our schools; it will also change the relation between expert and layman, and it will radically transform the role of the expert. The expert, instead of being the man who makes final decisions, would become a propagandist for a particular point of view. He would become a salesman. He would have to defend his proposals before laymen who are just as competent as he is, although in different fields. The situation would then be quite similar to the situation that obtained in Athens in the fifth century before Christ. In Athens every citizen could take part in the political discussions in the assembly. There were no experts in politics. True, there were people who knew more about this or that particular topic. But their knowledge did not give them authority over laymen. They were advisors; they were not decision-makers. And this is how I think every society should be arranged. Experts should be advisors; they should not be decision-makers. Laymen should make decisions; they should not leave decision-making to experts. Of course, laymen need education in order to make reasonable decisions. But this education must not turn them into experts. It must rather enable them to judge what the experts say.
Now there will be many people who will regard such a proposal as being hopelessly naive. How can laymen be given the power to criticise science when they don't know the first thing about science? How can they make decisions in areas which are highly complex and require years of training? My reply is very simple. There is not a single scientific result that could not be explained to a twelve-year-old child. Scientists themselves will admit this—as long as they are not asked to actually provide such explanations. As soon as they are asked to do so, they retreat, they use technical terms, they emphasize the 'complexity' of science. This complexity, however, is almost entirely due to the jargon scientists use and to the isolation in which they work. Remove the jargon, remove the isolation, and you will find that science is very much like common sense. At any rate, there is no reason why science should not be made understandable to laymen and there is no reason why laymen should not be able to judge it and to control it.
And now a final word about the attitude we should adopt towards ideologies. I have recommended tolerance. I have recommended a playful attitude. We should not take ideologies too seriously. We should read them as fairy tales. We should realise that ideologies may turn from being instruments of liberation into instruments of oppression. And we should be aware that such a transformation can occur almost overnight. The science that liberated man in the eighteenth century became an oppressive ideology in the twentieth century. Will it remain an oppressive ideology? Not necessarily. But the change will not come by itself. It will not come if we simply trust science and its spokesmen. It will come only if we realise that science, like any other ideology, can be dangerous and must be controlled. It will come only if we realise that we ourselves must be the controllers, that we cannot leave this control to experts, that we ourselves must learn, and think, and decide. It will come, in short, only if we defend society against science as we have learned to defend it against other oppressive ideologies.